---
layout: docs
toc_group: native-image
link_title: Native Image Compatibility and Optimization Guide
permalink: /reference-manual/native-image/Limitations/
---
# Limitations

Native Image uses a different way of compiling a Java application than the traditional Java virtual machine (VM).
It distinguishes between *executable build time* and *executable runtime*.
At executable build time, the native image builder performs static analysis to find all the methods that are reachable from the entry point of an application.
The builder then compiles these (and only these) methods into a native executable.
Because of this different compilation model, a Java application can behave somewhat differently when compiled into a native executable.

Native Image provides an optimization to reduce the memory footprint and startup time of an application.
This approach relies on a "closed-world assumption" in which all code is known at executable build time. That is, no new code is loaded at executable runtime.
As with most optimizations, not all applications are amenable to this approach.
If the native image building cis unable to optimize an application, it generates a so-called "fallback file" that requires a Java VM to run.

## Features Requiring Metadata

To use the closed-world optimization, the following Java features generally require metadata at executable build time.
This metadata ensures that a native executable uses the minimum amount of space necessary.
See [Reachability Metadata](ReachabilityMetadata.md) to learn more.

## Features Incompatible with the Closed-World Optimization

Some Java features are not yet supported within the closed-world optimization, and if used, result in a fallback file.

### `invokedynamic` Bytecode and Method Handles
Under the closed-world assumption, all methods that are called and their call sites must be known.
`invokedynamic` and method handles can introduce calls at runtime or change the method that is invoked.

Note that `invokedynamic` use cases generated by `javac` for, say, Java lambda expressions and string concatenation are supported because they do not change called methods at runtime.

### Security Manager
The Java security manager is no longer recommended as a way to isolate less trusted code from more trusted code in the same process.
This is because almost all typical hardware architectures are susceptible to side-channel attacks to access data that is restricted via the security manager.
Using separate processes is now recommended for these cases.

## Features That May Operate Differently in a Native Executable

A native executable implements some Java features differently to the Java VM.

### Signal Handlers

Registering a signal handler requires a new thread to start that handles the signal and invokes shutdown hooks.
By default, no signal handlers are registered when building a native executable, unless they are registered explicitly by the user.
For example, it is not recommended to register the default signal handlers when building a shared library, but it is desirable to include signal handlers when building a native executable for containerized environments, such as Docker containers.

To register the default signal handlers, pass the `--install-exit-handlers` option to the `native-image` builder.
This option gives you the same signal handlers as a Java VM.

### Class Initializers
By default, classes are initialized at runtime.
This ensures compatibility, but limits some optimizations.
For faster startup and better peak performance, it is better to initialize classes at build time.
Class initialization behavior can be specified using the options `--initialize-at-build-time` or `--initialize-at-run-time` for specific classes and packages or for all classes.
See `native-image --help` for details. 
Classes that are members of the JDK class libraries are initialized by default.

**Note**: class initialization at build time may break specific assumptions in existing code.
For example, files loaded in a class initializer may not be in the same place at build time as at runtime.
Also, certain objects such as a file descriptors or running threads must not be stored in a native executable.
If such objects are reachable at build time, the `native image` builder fails with an error.

For more information, see [Class Initialization in Native Image](ClassInitialization.md).

### Finalizers
The Java base class `java.lang.Object` defines the method `finalize()`.
It is called by the garbage collector on an object when garbage collection determines that there are no more references to the object.
A subclass can override the `finalize()` method to dispose of system resources or to perform other cleanup operations.

Finalizers have been deprecated since Java SE 9.
They are complicated to implement, and have badly designed semantics.
For example, a finalizer can cause an object to be reachable again by storing a reference to it in a static field.
Therefore, finalizers are not invoked.
We recommend you replace finalizers with weak references and reference queues.

### Threads
Native Image does not implement long-deprecated methods in `java.lang.Thread` such as `Thread.stop()`.

### Unsafe Memory Access
Fields that are accessed using `sun.misc.Unsafe` need to be marked as such for the static analysis if classes are initialized at build time.
In most cases, that happens automatically: field offsets stored in `static final` fields are automatically rewritten from the hosted value (the field offset for the Java VM on which the `native image` builder is running) to the native executable value, and as part of that rewrite the field is marked as `Unsafe`-accessed.
For non-standard patterns, field offsets can be recomputed manually using the annotation `RecomputeFieldValue`.

### Debugging and Monitoring
Java has some optional specifications that a Java implementation can use for debugging and monitoring Java programs, including JVMTI.
They help you monitor the Java VM at runtime for events such as compilation, for example, which do not occur in most native executables.
These interfaces are built on the assumption that Java bytecodes are available at runtime, which is not the case for native executables built with the closed-world optimization.
Because the native image builder generates a native executable, users must use native debuggers and monitoring tools (such as GDB or VTune) rather than tools targeted for Java.
JVMTI and other bytecode-based tools are not supported with Native Image.

## Related Documentation
* [Class Initialization in Native Image](ClassInitialization.md)
* [Debug Info Feature](DebugInfo.md)
* [Dynamic Proxy in Native Image](DynamicProxy.md)
* [Java Native Interface (JNI) in Native Image](JNI.md)
* [Native Image Build Configuration](BuildConfiguration.md)
* [Reflection Use in Native Executables](Reflection.md)

